---
layout: post
title:  "Exploring algorithmic: swap and bubble sort"
date:   2022-06-28 17:15:49 +02:00
tags: algorithmic Ruby
---

# Some general context

It’s been a while since my two initial posts, and although I progressed on some
other side projects at satisfying pace, I didn’t dedicated the time I wanted
to allocate for this project.

Well, in the mean time I also became father a second time, so I had other
priorities, and anyway I try to make my attention less scattered on too many
things in parallel. So maybe once I have finished one or two of my current
projects, I’ll have more time to dedicate to writting blog posts.

One thing I fully finished since my last post was to read [Polished Ruby Programming][polished]
by Jeremy Evans. It gave me a deeper knowledge of Ruby echosystem, and filled
me with ideas to create more modular gems. I didn’t have time to apply much
of what I lernt in it so far however. I will surely try to integrate some of
these insights in [Englishest][Englishest] at some point, but I first want to
focus on delievering a first major version which
[provides verbal alias for each ideographic method identifier][ideographic].

# Inspiration of this post

But as I’m determined to keep progress through learning material, I started to
read [40 Algorithms Every Programmer Should Know][40] by Imran Ahmad. The book
use Python to provide implementation examples. Altough Python is fine, I clearly
still prefer Ruby. So this gives me a great opportunity to make practical
exercises and implement these algorithm using Ruby.

The initial material recall basics of algorithmic analysis, especially the
way you can quantify the worst case scenario of an algorithm to evaluate its
performance, and the famous associated big-o notation. It also cover the basic
data structure one can use to implement algorithms, focused on Python, such as
list, tuple, dictionary and sets, as well as some already more advanced such as
DataFrame and Matrix, Vector, Stack, Queue and Tree. The book also provides
complexity of various basic operations on these structures such as time to
access, insert and remove an element in each case. We won’t cover these details
here, although that might be a topic for a later post.

The first actual algorithm presented in the book is the classical Bubble
Sort.  As the book recall, its worst-case performance is quadratic,
also refered as O(N²), which makes it a poor choice for any production
software, but perfect for didactic purposes. The implementation of Imran
Ahmad is repoduced below with its kind permission.

```python
def BubbleSort(list):
# Exchange the elements to arrange in order
  lastElementIndex = len(list)-1
  for passNo in range(lastElementIndex,0,-1):
    for idx in range(passNo):
      if list[idx]>list[idx+1]:
        list[idx],list[idx+1]=list[idx+1],list[idx]
  return list
```

Of course, neither in Python nor in Ruby you would need to really implement
such a basic algorithm, as they both come natively with a far more efficient
implementation of this operation. In the case of Ruby, there are `Array#sort`
and `Enumerable#sort`, as well as the more flexible `#sort_by` flavor, all
coming with their inplace modifying versions suffixed with a bang `!`.

Without further ado, here is an alternative self-made implementation in Ruby:
{% highlight ruby %}
class Array
  def swap!(spot, slot)
    tap{ self[spot], self[slot] = self[slot], self[spot] }
  end

  def bubble_sort!
    size.-(2).downto(1).each do |cap|
      0.upto(cap).each do |spot|
        slot = spot.next
        next unless self[spot] > self[slot]

        swap!(spot, slot)
      end
    end
    self
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

That’s it, but there is actually a lot of details about this implementation,
 and how it differs from the one proposed by Imran Ahmad.

First, this implementation use the so called Monkey Patching facility that Ruby
offers, that is it extends directly the Array class to add methods that will
achieve intended goal, and allows later expression like
`[2, 1, 5].bubble_sort!`.
Most object oriented programming langages in constrast come with closed classes:
you can’t modify them on the fly like this. This open class design of course
should be used sparingly in production code, otherwise overweight classes and
identifier collisions with hard to track side effects could easily arise. They
are well known methods to mitigate these issues without losing the benefit of
expressivity, and we shall explore them later on.

The next thing we can focus on is the `swap!` method. The retained method name
is classical, and probably don’t require much more comment. Wiktionary provides
the following definition: `To exchange or give (something) in an exchange
(for something else)`, which match perfectly want we intend indeed. Most
implementation of `swap` function out there seems to use parameters with dummy
identfiers, like `a, b`[^cppswap] or `x, y`[^cswap], or at best some numbered
couple of a more or less meaningful term like `pos1, pos2`[^pyswap] or even
some without any cryptic apocope like `index1, index2`[^javaswap]. Those used
in this implementation come out of a more personal approach to use identfiers
with names which are ideally:
0. usual English terms, without apocopes
0. meaningful in context
0. terse as long as it doesn’t conflict with previous requirement

The last point on terseness is a bit more weighted in my attention when these
terms are included within a line which include many terms, like the single one
defined in `swap!`.

Both `spot` and `slot` are usual English terms with a locative semantic. The
morpohlogical proximity is more fortuitous, altough they might be etymologically
related just like *splot* and *splotch*.

Regarding the famous unique line of `swap!` it uses `Kernel#tap` to return
`self` after due changes, without having to explicitely express it on a second
line. Indeed, an equivalent method body would be:
```ruby
    self[spot], self[slot] = self[slot], self[spot]
    self
```

Or even more verbosely using `return self` for the last line. The solution
however doesn’t opt for maximizing brevity, and avoid the shorter but more
cryptic `tap{ _1[spot], _1[slot] = _1[slot], _1[spot] }`, which uses the
[implicit numbered arguments introduced in Ruby 2.7][ina].

Moving on, we finally get to the `#bubble_sort!` method definition. As the
context provide directly access to the aimed main variable, it doesn’t take any
parameter. This is in contrast with a more bare functional approach where each
parameter is provided explicitely. For exemple in Python, even using an object
oriented implementation, one would write something like
`def bubble_sort(self):`.

In contrast Ruby bind `self` implicitely for you, and even let you call most
methods on self while completely omiting this term. That’s how the first line
can start directly with a call to `size`, rather than the more circumlocutory
`self.size`.

This first line is somehow dense, so we are going to chunck it, but note that
once you have all the implied acquaintances, all this is really
straightforwardly expressed.

Basically the goal of this line is to generate a list of index for the last
*spot* that will be considered in each pass. In the first pass, the last spot
is the penultimate element in the array, the last one being the *slot*.

So, since Ruby array indexes start at 0, if we have an Array with 10 elements,
the last *spot* of the first pass will have index 8, that is `size-2`, the
last *slot* will have index 9. Of course, the algorithm will first analyse if
a swap is required for elements with index 0 and it’s subsequent, and so on
until 8 included for this first circuit round. The next tour will go up to 7,
then 6, and so on until all laps where roamed.

The first line start with rather unusual way to call the minus operator, that is
`size.-(2)`. This allows to chain directly with a call to the `Integer#downto`
method. An other way to do that would be to use `#pred` twice: `size.pred.pred̀ .
Using latest development version of Englishest, it would be possible to express
it as `size.minus(2)` or `size.mow(2)` which would have my preference, but here
I wanted to stay on bare Ruby facilities. All the more it gives the opportunity
to recall how in Ruby operators are mostly regular methods which are given some
syntactic sugar privileges allowing them to be called in a different manner than
through the usual [tagememic][tagememic] [dot notation][dot] which act as a
[syncategorema][syncategorema], also called [syncategoremata][syncategoremata].
Of course you don’t need to understand any of this abstruse linguistic matter to
happily hack with this kind of stuff, but surely it might have a nice effect if
throwed at the appropriate audience. Don’t use them at your next familly dinner
though. 🤣

The code might be a bit clearer with a named variable assigned, as
`penultimate_index = size - 2`, so that the first loop would look like
`penultimate_index.downto(1).each…`.

With that in mind, the first line of this implementation is hopefully crystal
clear: `size.-(2)` compute the index of the last spot, `downto(1)` generate
an Enumerator that start with this integer and counts down to 1. Those elements
are taken as cap of new enumerators starting from 0. Thus the inner loop will
be given the current spot to consider upfront, and the slot is simply the
following integer. The loop can jump to the next iteration if no swap is
required on the current pair, otherwise the swap is done. Note that in this
implementation, we fully take advantage of Ruby flexible syntax, inherited from
Perl, and put the condition *after* the instruction to execute. This can
arguable sometime lead to code whose flow is harder to track, but when the
instruction is a flow control command, this result in a code that stick better
to how you might reason about the code, rather than how the machine instruction
set constraints your thought flow. This consideration partly explain why I chose
to put the condition on a separate line rather than using something like
`swap!(spot, slot) if self[spot] > self[slot]`. We could also replace the three
lines of the inner loop with a single one like
`_1>(_=_1+1) && swap!(_1,_)` if we would like to be especially cryptic.
<!-- -->_

Finally, once all loops where traversed, the method return the array
instance for conviniency: this allow to chain method in a fluent way. The
same result could be achieved using `tap` as in `swap!`, however this
would add one more block level depth that was judged undesirable here.

# The bangless version

As you might have notice, so far we provided only methods with a bang, that
denotes *some danger* in Ruby, like inplace modification of an instance. But
this is not a consistent garanty: `Array#push` will change the instance object
even it doesn’t have a bang suffix.
And as [Nick McCurdy famously report it][save]: `ActiveRecord::Base#save!` is a
version of `ActiveRecord::Base#save` that performs validations… and
`!` is only needed when there is a more dangerous version of a method that already
exists, and this does not necessarily mean that the dangerous method edits in place.

So let’s have *safe* versions for both methods `swap!` and `bubble_sort!`!

The easy way to do it, is to simply apply the changes on a copied version.
There are some points that worth our attention tough:
- this will impact performance as the whole list will have to be copied first;
- depending on object types in the list, a shallow copy could be insufficient.

Provided that we are fine with these aspects, the implementation could be as
easy as:

```ruby
# within class Array

def swap(...)
  clone.swap!(...)
end

def bubble_sort
  clone.bubble_sort!
end
```

For list of direct value like small numbers, that is enough, and for composed
values, it would ask to [create deep copy][deep-copy] whose
[efficient implementation][efficient-deep-copy] won’t be covered here.

# Modularization

As mentionned above, in practice you would rather avoid to directly integrate
your methods within a basic class. At the very least, you would first implement
them in a module, and extend the target class with this module like this:

```ruby
module Endopermutable
  def swap!(spot, slot)
    tap{ self[spot], self[slot] = self[slot], self[spot] }
  end
end
Array.include Endopermutable
```

With that, `Array.instance_method(:swap!)` will output a String which contains
something like `Array(Endopermutable)#swap!`, unless an other module override it
in the same manner: that makes code tracking far easier.

But there is more. You don’t actually need to directly include a module into
a basic class to benefit from its features in Ruby. Of course, you might create
a subclass, like in most object oriented language and include the module in this
subclass. But there is an other option in Ruby that allows for a thinner
granularity, which is mixing in a module directly into an object instance,
so that `[1,2].extend(Endopermutable).swap!(0,1)` will work as expected while
leaving the raw Array class unchanged, avoiding any side effect this might
generate.

# Generalizing the `swap` method


[polished]: https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/polished-ruby-programming/9781801072724/
[Englishest]: https://github.com/psychoslave/englishest
[ideographic]: https://github.com/psychoslave/englishest/issues/2
[40]: https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/40-algorithms-every/9781789801217/
[^pyswap]: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python-program-to-swap-two-elements-in-a-list/
[^cppswap]: https://www.cplusplus.com/reference/algorithm/swap/
[^cswap]: https://www.delftstack.com/howto/c/swap-function-in-c/
[^javaswap]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/64189589/how-to-swap-two-numbers-of-index1-and-index2-in-my-array
[ina]: https://bugs.ruby-lang.org/issues/4475
[tagememic]: https://www.britannica.com/science/linguistics/Tagmemics
[syncategorema]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syncategorematic_term
[dot]: https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/89031/what-is-the-origin-of-dot-notation
[syncategoremata]: https://doi.org/10.3406/hel.2003.2210
[save]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/25293302/why-do-some-ruby-methods-need-a-bang-and-others-dont-to-be-a-destructive-method
[deep-copy]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/8206523/how-to-create-a-deep-copy-of-an-object-in-ruby
[efficient-deep-copy]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/5643432/whats-the-most-efficient-way-to-deep-copy-an-object-in-ruby
